[[!meta title="Using roundcube for mailto: links"]]
[[!tag Firefox Kolab Roundcube lang:en]]

It’s quite annoying when you click somebody's name or email on a
web page and that [[!taglink Firefox]] cannot figure out how to rely on your
system preferences to send an email.

For instance, my system is set up so that when I click on an email
address or mailto: link anywhere, gnome-terminal opens up with
mutt ready to send an email. For some reason, Firefox tries to
figure out all by itself which program I should use.

I have tried to make Firefox use gnome-terminal with [[!taglink mutt]], but it
didn’t work. However, it's possible to add your own webmail there
(for some reason, I could choose between Yahoo Mail, Gmail and
Mykolab.com but I can't remember how I did that). Now that I have
my own [[!taglink Kolab]] instance with roundcube, I decided to add my own
webmail there. Unfortunately, it seems there's no way from the
graphical interface, so I went straight to:
<code>~/.mozilla/firefox/iceweaselprofile.hugo/mimeTypes.rdf</code>.

It's quite a big file FWIW (885 lines here). I did not have a look
at the details, but hopefully just adding this helps (for the
second block, make sure to merge with existing mailto handlers):

    <RDF:Description RDF:about="urn:handler:web:https://kolab.example.org/roundcubemail/?_task=mail&amp;_action=compose&amp;_to=%s"
           NC:prettyName="Kolab Groupware"
           NC:uriTemplate="https://kolab.example.org/roundcubemail/?_task=mail&amp;_action=compose&amp;_to=%s" />

    <RDF:Description RDF:about="urn:scheme:handler:mailto"
           NC:alwaysAsk="true">
        <NC:possibleApplication
        RDF:resource="urn:handler:web:https://kolab.example.org/roundcubemail/?_task=mail&amp;_action=compose&amp;_to=%s"/>
    </RDF:Description>

(Just replace <https://kolab.example.org/roundcubemail/> with
your own Roundcube location. And of course, if you don't use
Kolab replace "Kolab Groupware" by whatever.)
