[[!meta title="ikiwiki’s aggregate directive the right way"]]
[[!tag lang:en Ikiwiki]][[!meta language="en"]]

I’m a new [[!taglink ikiwiki]] user. I’ve been interested in using this,
because of the git version control, and I liked the idea that I
could just clone the entire ikiwiki on my laptop and thus edit it
offline with my [favourite editor](/tags/vim/).

So, as every new user, I make some mistakes which could have been
pretty easily avoided. Here’s one quite significant.

In order to generate the [[timeline]] I use the [aggregate
plugin](https://hroy.eu/ikiwiki/directive/aggregate/). That way I
can pull content from lots of sources through feeds, and put it
into one page and one feed. This timeline is like a big feed of
things I do everywhere on the web. In a way, it’s a [PESOS
approach](http://indiewebcamp.com/PESOS) in the IndieWeb.

One important technical detail is that the directive displays
information on the page itself, such as when was the last time the
source feed was checked. This means that each time the feeds are
checked, the page that contains the directive has to rebuild in
order to update the information.

Obviously, it was a very bad idea for the timeline, because that
meant that each time the sources were checked, the whole timeline
has to rebuild whole over again. And it took CPU time.

The people running <http://branchable.com> [fixed it for
me](http://source.hroy-eu.branchable.com/?p=source.git;a=commitdiff;h=cf39947e11f0cd57d473d34513a98e6d6677c9f4).
Thanks to them! I’ll make sure to use it as a reminder and have
separate files for that in the future!

If you have other tips to make ikiwiki more efficient, please
comment!
