[[!meta title="Kolab’s CardDav address lookup in mutt"]]
[[!tag Kolab lang:en mutt]]

This should work with any carddav server, but if you use Kolab's
carddav server here's some extra tip!

The problem you want to fix is: it's impossible to remember
everyone's email address. This problem is solved by most email
programs because they are linked to a contact list already.
However, for those of us using mutt, there's no full contact
integration so you need to rely on something else.

One obvious solution is to rely on a mail indexer to search and
find addresses in emails from the past. If you use mu, [here's how 
Karsten does it](http://blogs.fsfe.org/gerloff/2013/11/07/address-lookup-in-mutt-with-mu/).

However, that's not really helping if you have contact information
from multiple sources (e.g. typing on your mobile the email
address of somebody you just met AFK). This is where a contact
server is handy.

----

If you use Google's contacts, you can use [goobook] it works well
but it's quite slow IMHO. And obviously, the problem is that you
have given up your whole contact list to Google.

[goobook]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/goobook/1.4alpha4#mutt

# Find your Kolab addressbook

With [Kolab 3.1] comes a CardDav/CalDav/webDav server!  Version
3.1 was just released today. So let's use that instead.

[kolab 3.1]: http://kolab.org/news/2013/11/07/kolab-3.1-released-new-cloud-storage-feature-and-irony

  - When I set up Kolab 3.1 before the official release, I got a
    packaging bug in CentOS, but [it's easy to fix](http://source.hroy-eu.branchable.com/?p=source.git;a=blob_plain;f=configs/kolab.mdwn;hb=7581e11fef10a7f7d01ac5f718b3f65178b0fd7c).

  - The *Dav server is located at <https://kolab.example.org/iRony>.
    Now, you need to find how to link to a specific addressbook. I
    tried to have a look at the Roundcube interface, for a folder
    id or something, but I could not find any that was working.

  - Just connect a webDav client (in Nautilus, File > Connect to a
    server) to the iRony folder, and then just navigate to find
    the addressbook identifier (look in the address bar!)

# Sync your CardDav addressbook with pyCardDAV

Now install [pyCardDav] which just landed on Debian last
month:

[pyCardDav]: http://lostpackets.de/pycarddav

<pre class="terminal"><code># apt-get install pycarddav</code></pre>

  - Sync pycarddav after you entered the Kolab addressbook
    resource in the config file with <code>pycardsyncr</code>

    I advise you run this with <code>--debug</code> to make sure
    that it does not get stuck in case you have some illegal
    characters inside one of your vCards. If it gets stuck, then
    you can just go back to your webDav client and edit the file
    that's causing trouble.

  - If all goes well, you should be able to search for contacts
    inside your local copy:

    <pre class="terminal"><code>% pc_query hugo
searching for hugo...
Name: Hugo Roy
TEL (CELL): +...
EMAIL (INTERNET\, WORK): hugo at fsfe dot org</code></pre>

# Lookup directly from mutt

I just added this to my [~/.muttrc](https://github.com/hugoroy/.mutt):

    set query_command="pc_query -m '%s'"
    bind editor <Tab> complete-query

That way, in mutt, just type ‘Q’ to search for a contact. Or you
can also press ‘m’ to start a new message, start typing in the
‘To:’ field the name of your contact and just press [Tab] to have
autocompletion!
