[[!meta title="First tips for Mutt beginners"]]
[[!tag lang:en Mutt]][[!meta language="en"]]

Once you have Mutt up and running with the basic tools that will
allow you to [fetch][offlineimap], [index][notmuch], view,
[edit][vim] and [send][msmtp] email, there are a couple of
things that you probably need in your ``.muttrc``, 
[[!toggle id="necessaryonly" text="""
no matter what.
"""]]
[[!toggleable  id="necessaryonly" text="""
I left out all things which are about visual taste, use with
external programs, etc. These are really about correcting some
defaults which I think are not sane. 
"""]]

[offlineimap]: http://offlineimap.org/
[vim]: http://vim.org/
[notmuch]: http://notmuchmail.org/
[msmtp]: http://msmtp.sourceforge.net/

  - In Mutt, even if you are on the pager that lets you read a
  selected email, the ``<up>`` and ``<down>`` keys will not help
  you navigate *inside* the email; instead they will bring you to
  the previous or to the next email in the index.

    That’s rather weird and unexpected. One of the first thing I
    did was trying to scroll inside an email, and Mutt suddenly
    browsed dozens of emails from the index (even marking them as
    read…). That’s quite unhelpful. To solve this, add:

        bind pager <up> previous-line #scroll inside the message rather than the index
        bind pager <down> next-line

    That way, you can scroll, or use the arrow keys to read an
    email inside the pager.

    When the pager is not opened, the up and down keys will behave
    as usual in the index.

  - To make Mutt faster

        set sleep_time = 0 # be fast

    Don’t worry, this does not affect anything, it will just be
    faster. Here’s the doc about ``sleep_time``:

    > Specifies  time,  in  seconds, to pause while displaying
    certain informational messages, while moving from folder to
    folder  and after  expunging messages from the current folder.
    The default is to pause one second, so a value of zero for
    this option suppresses the pause.

  - When you display email in the pager, it can look ugly when the
  lines are too long and that Mutt, by default, is not very nice
  about line-wrapping because it can cut words in the middle. You
  probably want to add:

        set smart_wrap

  - Changing between mailboxes can be a pain by default in Mutt.
  You need to tell Mutt where to find your several mailboxes, so
  you’ll be able to switch between them more easily (for instance
  by pressing ``y`` or with the sidebar). Add:

        mailboxes $Mail

    I have seen on some Mutt configs that ``y``
    sometimes does not toggle the list of mailboxes. In that case, you
    can add something like: 

        macro index y "<change-folder>?<toggle-mailboxes>" "show incoming mailboxes list"

