[[!meta title="Getting things done with Mutt and org-mode"]]
[[!tag Emacs Org-mode lang:en Mutt GTD]][[!meta language="en"]]

The way it works is:

  - You’re reading an email on Mutt and you think: Oh, I should
  really remember that because I need to do X.
  - You pass this email to emacs’ org-mode containing:
     - the subject, the date and the from
     - a link to that email which is ``mutt:Message-ID``
  - You add some information if you wish to, and you save this in
  your org-mode todo file.

Now, you’re in your org-mode todo list, you can work with it as
usual. Now you have this bit, and you need to remember what it’s
about exactly. You can click the link in org-mode, and it will
open Mutt and show you the right email in Mutt! 

  - More info on [Zack’s blog]
  - Get org-mutt directly from his [git repo]

[Zack’s blog]: http://upsilon.cc/~zack/blog/posts/2010/02/integrating_Mutt_with_Org-mode/
[git repo]: http://git.upsilon.cc/?p=utils/org-mutt.git;a=summary

# Make `mutt-open` work with `mutt-sidebar`

I used [mutt-sidebar] and I couldn’t get ``./mutt-open`` to work
correctly. I fixed this by changing:

    HIDE_SIDEBAR_CMD="B"     # set to empty string if sidebar is not used

You need to update ``B`` with whatever you use to toggle the
sidebar. I use CTRL-B so I changed it to
``HIDE_SIDEBAR_CMD="\CB"``. That’s it! 

This is the due to the fact that mutt-open has
something called ``mutt_keys`` that’s used to display the right
email in mutt. However in its current state mutt_keys decides to
toggle the sidebar before it actually shows the email. Hence if
the toggle sidebar key is not well defined in mutt-open, mutt will
hang up there. So I changed this to:

    mutt_keys="/=i$msgid\n\n$HIDE_SIDEBAR_CMD"

[mutt-sidebar]: https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/mutt-sidebar/

# Make `mutt-open` work with `mutt-kz`

Since [mutt-kz] comes with a sidebar as well, the previous paragraph applies. But you might need further changes to the original mutt-open script. Here’s how mine works:

    mutt_keys="<vfolder-from-query>id:$msgid\n\n<entire-thread>"


[mutt-kz]: https://github.com/karelzak/mutt-kz
