
[[!meta title="12:14"]]
[[!meta license="[CC0-1.0](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)"]]
[[!meta description="Finally, the facts around Brendan Eich’s resignation"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag lang:en Mozilla]]

Somebody working at Mozilla put together [a timeline of facts
surrounding Brendan Eich’s resignation](https://medium.com/p/7645a4bf8a2).

> And the real tragedy here is that Mozilla would have sorted this
out satisfactorily if it hadn’t been sensationalized by the media
and turned into an internet witch hunt. Anyone who wrote a news
story, posted to their blog, or tweeted about Brendan without
understanding paragraph (i)(c) of the [Community Participation
Guidelines][cpgmoz] was part of the mob that brought Brendan down.
>
> For more than 15 years, Brendan fought for openness and freedom on
the web, and led many of the people who built that open and free
web. This week, in a senseless, vicious convulsion, the web turned
on him.

[cpgmoz]: http://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/governance/policies/participation/

Meanwhile, Mozilla published an [FAQ](https://blog.mozilla.org/blog/2014/04/05/faq-on-ceo-resignation/).

 > **Q: Was Brendan Eich forced out by employee pressure?**
 > 
 > A: No. While these tweets calling for Brendan’s resignation were
 widely reported in the media, they came from only a tiny number
 of people: less than 10 of Mozilla’s employee pool of 1,000. None
 of the employees in question were in Brendan’s reporting chain or
 knew Brendan personally.
 > 
 > In contrast, support for Brendan’s leadership was expressed from
 a much larger group of employees, including those who felt
 disappointed by Brendan’s support of Proposition 8 but
 nonetheless felt he would be a good leader for Mozilla.
 Communication from these employees has not been covered in the
 media.

Which echoes something written in the timeline mentioned above:

 > 11) On March 27th, a small number of Mozillians tweeted
 variants of “I am an employee of @mozilla and I’m asking
 @brendaneich to step down as CEO”. These tweets were reported by
 the tech press, and my perception is that this was the start of
 the media firestorm. Most (or perhaps all) of the Mozillians who
 tweeted this were employed by the Mozilla Foundation, not the
 Mozilla Corporation which means that they report to the executive
 director of the foundation and not to the CEO. As foundation
 employees, they did not share the same org chart as Brendan.

This is why [pieces like this trouble me](http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/04/brendan-eich-coming-out-party-mozilla-ceo):

 > Both writers seem concerned that Eich's resignation is a defeat
 for freedom of expression. If anything, it is a victory – the
 ouster of a founder and CEO by his own people, at a foundation
 based on open and equal expression, should be the new textbook
 example of the system working exactly as it should. 

I hope [[this episode|posts/mozilla-eich-down]] is now closed and that everybody learns a
lesson from this.


(Especially, the guys at Rarebit who, after publishing an article
“5 reasons why Brendan Eich should step down” now write “I want to
say how absolutely sad to hear that Brendan Eich stepped down.” No
comments.)
