
[[!meta title="Reading the Secret App ToS"]]
[[!meta license="[CC0-1.0](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)"]]
[[!meta copyright="The Secret ToS are ©2014 Secret Inc. Extracts
used without authorisation for the goal of providing relevant
criticism and opinion."]]
[[!meta description="In a nutshell: they're not very good. But
there's an interesting question here."]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag lang:en Terms_of_Service privacy Secret_App]]

So it seems [Secret](https://www.secret.ly/tos) is the new thing.
So I had a look at [their terms of service][secretos]. Here are
some extracts:

[secretos]: https://www.secret.ly/tos

[[!toggle id="secretosbad" text="""
TL;DR: They’re not good.
"""]]

[[!toggleable id="secretosbad" text="""
 > However, unless we expressly state otherwise, your right to use
the Service does not include (i) publicly performing or publicly
displaying the Service,

That's funny, because it seems to imply that taking a screenshot
of a secret and tweeting it is forbidden (although the Secret
co-founder uses them in his [post explaining how it works
technically][secretworks].)

[secretworks]: https://medium.com/secret-den/12ab82fda29f


 > When you post, link or otherwise make available content to the
Service, you grant us a nonexclusive, royalty-free, perpetual,
irrevocable and fully sublicensable right to use, reproduce,
modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from,
distribute, perform and display such content throughout the world
in any manner or media, on or off the App.

This got to be the most [extreme copyright license in Terms of
Service](http://tosdr.org/topics.html#copyright-scope) that I have
ever seen.

Basically, it's as if you did not exist as an author. Which is
fine because it's supposed to be a secret. But in the process,
Secret wants all the rights for themslves (and their future
business partners I assume).

 > ### Modification to the service
 > 
 > Secret reserves the right in its sole discretion to review,
improve, modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, the
Service and/or any features, information, materials or content on
the Service with or without notice to you. 



 > ### Suspension/Termination
 > 
 > Secret may suspend and/or terminate your rights with respect to
the Service for any reason or for no reason at all and with or
without notice at Secret’s sole discretion. 



 > ### Governing Law; Arbitration
 > 
 > PLEASE READ THE FOLLOWING PARAGRAPHS CAREFULLY BECAUSE THEY
REQUIRE YOU TO ARBITRATE DISPUTES WITH SECRET AND LIMIT THE MANNER
IN WHICH YOU CAN SEEK RELIEF FROM SECRET.
> 
> […]
> 
> If settlement is not reached within 60 days after service of a
written demand for mediation, any unresolved controversy or claim
will be resolved by arbitration in accordance with the rules of
the American Arbitration Association before a single arbitrator in
San Francisco, California.



> Legal Compliance
> 
> You represent and warrant that: (i) you are not located in a
country that is subject to a U.S. Government embargo, or that has
been designated by the U.S. Government as a “terrorist supporting”
country; and (ii) you are not listed on any U.S. Government list
of prohibited or restricted parties. 

That's funny. I guess I don't know if I'm on a US government list
of restricted parties!
"""]]


Oh, and here's the [Privacy policy][secretprivacy].

[secretprivacy]: https://www.secret.ly/privacy

In case you thought you were “anonymous” when using Secret, think
again:

 > We may share information about you as follows or as otherwise
described in this privacy policy:
 > 
 > - In response to a request for information if we believe
    disclosure is in accordance with any applicable law,
    regulation or legal process, or as otherwise required by any
    applicable law, rule or regulation;
