[[!meta title="First impressions on the Dell XPS13"]]
[[!tag lang:en Dell-XPS-13]][[!meta language="en"]]

After I found out that Dell was selling one thing, but
[delivering another], I decided to leave the new laptop for a bit.
Anyway, right now is not the time to tweak settings and setups.

[delivering another]: /posts/dell_ubuntu_wireless/

Meanwhile, trying to have a reasonable conversation with Dell’s
customer service, it seems that some basic rules of commerce need
to be restated:

  - when you advertise to sell something and somebody buys it,
    you’re supposed to deliver the thing you advertised -- not
    something else.

  - in the event that you sell something else, at least make sure
    the product you’re selling fulfils its functions
      - in the case of a laptop that is too thin to have an RJ45
        port, that means delivering a supported wireless chipset!

Dell France has been extremely unhelpful in fixing anything here.
And well, their websites all over the web still advertise the
Intel wireless chipset, without ever mentioning the Qualcomm
Atheros. 

So, being tired of wasting time with this, I decided to get a hold
of that laptop, and see if the wireless issue was easily fixed. I
needed be done with it quickly to decide if I was going to persue
with this, or just go for cancelling the whole sell, as cryptie
shared [her comments] on her own XPS-13 and made me think twice
before reclaiming an intel chipset.

[her comments]: http://hroy.eu/posts/dell_ubuntu_wireless/#comment-83647c0fd7fef5436ae6ad74dafd2aa9

Moreover, friends [in Finland] with the same issue pointed out to me
a quick fix. However, I wholly agree with their update:

[in Finland]: http://seravo.fi/2013/dell-xps-13-ubuntu-edition-first-impressions

 > We found out that the in the new laptop shipped to us this fall
 the Intel wifi card has been replaced with an Atheros wifi card,
 which unfortunately does not have a proper Linux driver, thus the
 connection issues. It seems Dell has been aware of Atheros wifi
 card problems since July as a thread in the Dell support forum
 shows, but still they ship the “downgraded” crappy model. With
 some tweaking, you may or may not get the Atheros wifi model
 working.
 > 
 > As the whole point of buying a pre-installed Linux laptop is to
 get hardware that is guaranteed to work with Linux, we can no
 longer recommend this laptop. It is a shame. Our earlier Dell XPS
 13 still works perfectly as it has the Intel wifi card.

Dell, this is a shame. 

This is a real shame because the XPS-13 is a very good laptop. I
have been using it the whole day, and I already prefer it over the
thinkpad edge that I have been using for the last three years. The
keyboard is very pleasant to type on, it’s also very lightweight
(1.35 kgs) and it has some hardware features I’ve been looking
forward to a lot (like keyboard lightning, now I can type in the
shadow like a super-hacker!) Not to mention that the whole way
your employees for France have dealt with the issue is a real
disgrace. Wake up!

* * *

Anyway, for those of you who have the XPS-13 and experience issues
with the “Network controller: Qualcomm Atheros AR9462 Wireless
Network Adapter (rev 01)” here’s [what to do],

[what to do]: http://en.community.dell.com/techcenter/os-applications/f/4613/t/19515554.aspx "See post by Chicochaz on 27 Aug 2013 4:33 PM"

<pre class="terminal">
<code>$ wget https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/projects/backports/2013/06/18/backports-20130618.tar.xz
$ tar xvf backports-20130618.tar.xz
$ cd backports-20130618

# make defconfig-ath9k
# make -j3
# make install
# depmod -a
# service network-manager stop
# sleep 5
# modprobe -r ath9k
# modprobe ath9k
# service network-manager start</code>
</pre>

You need to do the above every time the kernel is updated. BTW
this does not fix all the issues with the wireless. Another very
annoying problem is that I cannot disable bluetooth without the
hardware messing up with wifi as well. (This is supposed to be
[fixed] with the canonical ppa but it isn’t).

[fixed]: https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux/+bug/901410

I'm looking forward to see how this machine is going to behave
when I try different distros… (I’m considering Arch at the moment.)
