[[!meta title="Facebook, an open source company?"]]
[[!tag lang:en nonsense free_software openness Facebook]]

In today’s world, communication and branding matter almost as much
in business as they do in conveying ideas and ethics. Which is why
I often wonder, what the people using the term “Open Source” are
doing against
[this](http://readwrite.com/2013/10/17/is-facebook-the-worlds-largest-open-source-company):

 > Is Facebook The World's Largest Open Source Company?

Yes, says Matt Asay–who claimed that for Free Software/Open Source
to succeed in business, [“it may need a little help from
proprietary software.”](http://news.cnet.com/8301-13505_3-10168267-16.html)

So, one must wonder… 

# What makes Facebook an Open Source company?

I hope that, at this point, we can drop the notion of Free
Software; because free software focuses on the [users’
rights](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) to be
in control of the technology that affects them. If there’s anyone
in control of Facebook, it’s Mark Zuckerberg, certainly not the
users.
[[!toggle id="fsvos" text="↓↓↓"]]

[[!toggleable  id="fsvos" text="""
 - Even though open source software and free software designate
   the [exact same category of
   software](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/categories.en.html),
   and the [community of people who develop free and open source
   software](http://blog.hugoroy.eu/2012/02/23/free-software-v-open-source-community/)
   is not as divided as some might think, there’s no denying that
   the terms convey different meaning, have a different emphasis.

    Actually, it’s not entirely clear to me what the term Open Source
    conveys any more. What hasn’t helped at all, is the belief that
    “the Internet”, as Morozov would put it, can been used as the
    driver for solving everything in all areas; and that the
    same is true of Open Source. Open Source bears some of the
    same hype that “the Internet” does. Think open data, open
    access, open innovation[^open-innov], open government, open science, etc.

[^open-innov]: What’s most troubling about “open innovation” is that
innovation itself is deeply misunderstood, too often confused with
merely “packaging” existing technologies–at which Apple excels,
even though Apple is far, far, from being “open.”
"""]]

What “[open](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/open)” even
means is relatively ambiguous. Ambiguous enough that Facebook can
claim as far as 2006 to be about a “[spirit of
openness](https://www.facebook.com/notes/facebook/the-spirit-of-openness/2223862130).”

That reminds me of an [internal European Commission
draft](http://fsfe.org/activities/os/eifv2.en.html) that was
leaked on which I worked with Karsten at the
[FSFE](http://fsfe.org) in 2009:

> "Specifications, software and software development methods
that promote collaboration and the results of which can freely be
accessed, reused and shared are considered open and lie at one end
of the spectrum while non-documented, proprietary specifications,
proprietary software and the reluctance or resistance to reuse
solutions, i.e. the "not invented here" syndrome, lie at the other
end.

> The spectrum of approaches that lies between these two
extremes can be called the openness continuum."

With this kind of nonsense, you can say anything. I was trying to
put it into words. I remember Georg put it brilliantly: to say
that proprietary software lies at one end of the openness
continuum equals to saying that North-Korea lies at one end of the
democratic continuum.

Maybe all this is possible, because in this context, open is meant
to refer explicitly to free software/open source software. But
that’s missing the point of what free software actually is about,
and about how you categorise free software.

Proprietary software isn’t at the end of the free software
continuum, it’s antagonistic to free software. They’re opposite.
You can't have both; it's either something’s been distributed to
the users of the program with a license that grants them the four
essential rights to use, share, study and improve the program; or
it's not.

Now, let’s go back to Facebook. Without thinking clearly, sure,
Facebook could end up inside the “openness continuum” of whatever.

But before saying that Facebook is an open source company, one
must ask: is Facebook a software company to begin with? And if
not, then what is Facebook doing that has to do with open source
at all?

Look closely, and you’ll realise that all that Facebook’s
releasing as free software/open source is not related to the core
of the service they're providing their users with over at
facebook.com. 

Sure, it's publishing some of its in-house developed software, for
data centers, database, etc. In that sense, it's quite clearly in
accordance to the current mantra, “[open source (almost)
everything](http://tom.preston-werner.com/2011/11/22/open-source-everything.html)”
in which the part that's left off is actually the most important
part.

But that's not enough to call yourself an “open source company.”
Or does that mean that all manufacturers embedding a linux kernel
in their device are open source companies as soon as they release
sources of their modifications to the kernel?  Of course not!

# What makes a Free Software company, then?

 >  usage of and contribution to Free Software are not
 >  differentiators for what makes a Free Software company. The
 >  critical differentiator is provision of Free Software
 >  downstream to customers. In other words: Free Software
 >  companies are companies that have adopted business models in
 >  which the revenue streams are not tied to proprietary software
 >  model licensing conditions.

Georg published [an
article](https://fsfe.org/freesoftware/enterprise/freesoftwarecompany.en.html)
in 2008 precisely about this issue.
