---
iw-class: post
title-meta: "Coming back from the first FSFE Coordinators Meeting"
lang: "en-GB"
iw-directives: 
 - [[!tag FSFE lang:en]]
...


<aside class="pull-right">
[[!img /images/fsfe_ecm-group_pic/2013-09-ECM-group-picture.JPG caption="Some of the 22
FSFE coordinators and Karsten" alt="group picture"
link="/images/fsfe_ecm-group_pic/" size="200x200"]]
</aside>

Last week, I left Paris for the [first ever FSFE coordinators
meeting](https://blogs.fsfe.org/lucile.falg/2013/10/01/first-european-coordinators-meeting-2/).
So-called “coordinators” who came to this meeting are FSFE
activists, usually volunteers, organising activities and campaigns
with other FSFE fellows and free software activists in their local
area. They also usually hold FSFE fellowship meetings to prepare
such activities, discuss Free Software, attend and organise talks,
etc.[^meanwhile] These coordinators are amongst the most important volunteers
within FSFE. Some of the groups they coordinate were started
around 2005 when the Free Software Foundation Europe launched the
Fellowship programme, which is the primary way free software
activists can identify with the FSFE and support it work. 

[^meanwhile]: Meanwhile in Vienna, Fellows of the FSFE had a booth
at the city hall for the Game City Fair. [Check it
out!](http://blogs.fsfe.org/franz.gratzer/2013/10/03/fsfe-booth-on-game-city-fair-2013-in-vienna/)

(BTW, there's now a very simple way to show us your support, and
that's to sign-up as a supporter: <https://fsfe.org/support>.)

As [former fellowship
representative](https://wiki.fsfe.org/election11), I attended 2
[General Assemblies](https://fsfe.org/about/members.html) for
FSFE, and thus had the chance to visit 2 European cities I've
never been to, and connect to free software users and developers
in the area of Ljubljana and Lisbon (in 2 weeks, it will be
Vienna!)

However, I've expressed on these occasions that there should be
other face-to-face meetings within the FSFE, because they're
important for our personal relations and they're
motivation-boosters. Aside from that, the meetings themselves can
also be very productive.

So the mere fact that this first FSFE coordinators meeting has
happened is already great, and I'm sure looking forward to the
next one! I think we should take the chance that most of us will
be at FOSDEM, as usual, to organise something in addition to
FOSDEM (like one day before).

Thanks to everyone who joined!
