[[!meta title="New Gnome Empathy design… argh!"]]
[[!tag GNOME design lang:en]]

So now that I completed the upgrade, I see some new GNOME stuff
coming in. Great, I like new stuff because I generally like the
direction GNOME is taking. I can't wait to see GNOME 3.10 with the
high-resolution display capabilities!

So I opened one of the GNOME application that I use the most (and
I have been using it for, what? 3-4 years?): [Empathy]. But this
upgrade has got me wondering: do GNOME designers use it?

[Empathy]: https://live.gnome.org/Empathy

Okay, so Empathy has [a new design since 3.6](https://help.gnome.org/misc/release-notes/3.6/users-empathy.html.en).
This is how it looks like after upgrading:

[[!img empathy-large.png size="666x374"]]

First, I was like: “Heeeeey! where are the groups?” I mean, this
is a useful feature when I need to find people related to
something specific. For instance, I’ve got a group of contacts for
FSFE but I also have one for Paris or Berlin. If I'm planning a
trip to Berlin, I just open that group and go talk to friends who
are there.

Fortunately, there's a way to bring the groups back. But that's
not the point.

 1. The groups are a very useful feature, I'm not sure why it
 makes sense to remove them by default. And anyway for people who
 don't use groups, I suppose it does not change anything: so why
 remove them for people how might use them?

 2. I had to find the Gnome release notes on the Web to see there
 was an option to bring the groups back. It just reminds me that
 there should be a better way to introduce users to design changes
 when doing system upgrades! For instance, when some Firefox
 addons upgrade, they open a new tab with release versions, etc.

 3. The design changes are really questionable. The rationale on
 the release notes is consistency with the GNOME Contacts app. But
 I don't understand this. The result is that the list view shows
 less people than before, so I can see less people connected at
 the same time, which makes the whole list view *less* useful. 
 
    Is that just because designers investigated that most people
    only have a handful of contacts connected at the same time? I
    doubt that's the case. Most people I know say that they have
    more than 300 “friends” on Facebook usually… so I don't think
    I'm the only one with constantly more than 30 people
    connected.

    Or maybe it is because bigger picture looks nice…

# A suggestion for real improvement

While there might be reasons for the redesign, it's astonishing
that this design did not solve the main problem with the list
view. The Empathy list view has basically not changed since it was
first made, and I [already complained about it back then](http://blog.hugoroy.eu/2010/02/13/un-meilleur-affichage-des-listes-de-contacts/)
(probably I did not reach the right people, it was kind of silly
of me to write that in French).

The main problem IMHO is that the list view does not adapt to the
window size! Go have a look at the screenshot above. This is so
silly, why insist on display each contact on a whole block? What
strikes me is that the solution is obvious. Here's how Moblin did
it in 2009:

[[!img moblin_people.png size="666x391"]]

With the same screen estate, Empathy would be able to show 4
connected people at the same time, instead of 16. Combine this
with a group view, and you've got a decent way to see who's
online; which is what the list view is for, right?

----

*Update*: I opened an issue about this
<https://bugzilla.gnome.org/show_bug.cgi?id=711667>.

And apparently, GNOME is exploring other designs for the Chat
application: <https://wiki.gnome.org/Design/Apps/Chat>. But that
still seems like a long way to go, while my proposal seems like a
quick fix.
