[[!meta title="GNU GPL, JS and BS"]]
[[!meta license="[CC0-1.0](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)"]]
[[!meta description="Be careful what you read about how the GPL applies to Javascript. There’s a lot of nonsense out there"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag lang:en Javascript GNU_GPL free_software licenses]]<aside
class="pull-right">[[!img js.png alt="JS"]]</aside>

<small>This is a long due post, in response to a thread about a [new JS
outliner released under the GPL][concordgpl]. I just did not take
the time to write something about it until now… sorry!</small>

[concordgpl]: http://scripting.com/2013/09/16/concordOurGplOutliner

It’s quite outstanding, but trying to find some good resource
online about this issue is nearly impossible. If you try to read
about how the [[!taglink GNU_GPL|GNU GPL]] impacts javascript web
apps, you will find so much nonsense---that will make you
believe the GPL is going to “infect” everything.
(In spite of the fact that some of the most important Javascript
libraries out there are licensed under the GPL, like Jquery IIRC.)

First, let’s get things straight: the GNU GPL does not infect
anything nor has any “viral” effect. You don’t catch the GPL like
the flu. In order for GPL obligations to kick in and apply to you, 
you must either:

  1. distribute GPL-licensed Javascript files; or

  2. write something that is *based on* GPL-licensed Javascript
  files.

In the first case, it’s no surprises that if you download and
distribute GPL-licensed software, you must respect the conditions
of the GPL.

In the second case, it’s a little bit more difficult to grasp,
because you need to understand what constitutes a work *based on
the GPL program.* And for this, you need an basic understanding of
copyright law.

If you build other Javascript parts which will work with the
GPL Javascript, there’s a fair chance that the whole is based on
the GPL Javascript and thus is subject to the conditions of the
GPL. (That’s the intended effect: it’s
[copyleft](https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/)!) So for instance, if
you write Javascript in which you re-use the functions of the
GPL JS library, that will be covered by the GPL as well.

But for pretty much everything else, it’s not covered. So
basically, just **adding a line of `script` to interact with the DOM
is not going to make the entire website subject to the GPL**. That
would be like saying using LibreOffice forces you to distribute
all documents produced with it under the GPL. It’s just nonsense.
Keep in mind that this is a legal thing, this is copyright law;
this is not software development.

So in the case of the [Concord outliner](http://scripting.com/2013/09/16/concordOurGplOutliner)
it’s pretty obvious: if you put an outliner in your web app,
it’s not going to make the whole web app covered by the GPL.
However, if you integrate the outliner and that you build your
web app on top of that outliner; you expand it, so yes, that’s
covered. But hey, that’s what the GPL is for.

Otherwise, write your own from scratch or try an alternative
license, like the MPL-2.0.
