[[!meta title="I ♥ Free Software: Mutt"]]
[[!tag ilovefs FSFE Mutt lang:en]]

Today is Valentine’s day, a day to celebrate love. But at the Free
Software Foundation Europe, we like to challenge traditions. So we
thought: why not [also celebrate Free Software on this
day][ilovefs]? Because what
makes Free Software so great is the people who make it, it’s the
community!

[ilovefs]: http://ilovefs.org

And what better personal example than my use of the [mutt email
agent][wikimutt] to explain why this community is truly important?

[wikimutt]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutt_%28email_client%29

I’ve always been a bit curious about mutt. Mutt is a program that
lives in your terminal, and basically all it does is show an index
of emails in mailboxes, then lets you view these emails. In the
pure UNIX tradition, the rest is left to other tools. So every
tool has its focus on what it’s good at; and everything is glued
together with open formats and protocoles.

The reason why I’ve been always curious with mutt is because email
is a big part of my workflow (and my life); but I felt that the
way I managed email sucked.

So when I wanted to have a look in mutt, which is quite austere, I
went to “mutterwares”, i.e. tupperware meetings for mutt users.
Just like Mozilla launched the [TupperVim](http://wiki.mozfr.org/TupperVim)
to gather vim users to share tips, experiences, plugins, configs
and so forth.

Now, I have been using mutt for nearly a year, and I don’t think
I’m ever going back to something else.

Last Monday, there was a 3rd [Mutterware] in Paris, in which Zack demoed
two programs he wrote: [notmuch-mutt] and [org-mutt].

[Mutterware]: https://wiki.fsfe.org/groups/Paris/Mutterware
[notmuch-mutt]: http://notmuchmail.org/notmuch-mutt/
[org-mutt]: http://git.upsilon.cc/?p=utils/org-mutt.git;a=summary

Notmuch-mutt enables you to index your entire email archive, so
you can tag emails, search for emails, etc. It also has a
killer-feature: from any email in any inbox, you can reconstruct
the entire thread to which it belongs, no matter where the rest of
the emails are stored (for instance, if you archive your email in
other mailboxes).

[[!img zack-mutterware-notmuch.png caption="Zack reconstructed the thread about Mutterware"]]


Org-mutt enables you to glue mutt and org-mode together. So you
can easily create a new task from an email, and you can link that
task back to mutt’s view of that email.

During this mutterware, Zack helped me find why I couldn’t get
    org-mode to work, and so [we fixed a
    bug](http://git.upsilon.cc/?p=utils/org-mutt.git;a=commit;h=1ae5a5adb5ee8a41bf5716b8c9247e4d0d6a8fe7)!
    I still have to get something fixed, but it’s already very useful
    and great.

So, thanks a BUNCH to Zack and to Michael R. Elkins, mutt
developer.

