[[!meta title="Innovation policy and Internet liability in courts"]]
[[!meta description="This is what happens when innovation becomes
the only criteria to judge policy, like we see sometimes in law."]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag lang:en innovation policy law France liability]]

[Morozov][morozovinnopolicy] on innovation policy:

> But why assume that innovation—and, by extension, economic
growth—should be the default yardstick by which we measure the
success of technology policy? One can easily imagine us living
with a very different “Internet” had the regulators of the 1990s
banned websites from leaving small pieces of code—the so-called
“cookies”—on our computers. Would this slow down the growth of the
online advertising industry, making everyday luxuries such as free
e-mail unavailable? Most likely. But advertising is hardly the
only way to support an e-mail service: It can also be supported
through fees or even taxes. Such solutions might be bad for
innovation, but the privacy they afford to citizens might be good
for democratic life.

[morozovinnopolicy]: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/116939/innovation-fetish-naive-buzzword-unites-parties-avoids-policy-choice

We should note that this ultimate goal of innovation is also what
drives most of the debate around internet business liability.
There’s so much fear at the European Union that the next law would
stifle innovation and [[!toggle id="killgooglenext" text="nip in
the bud the “next Google” that any"]]
sane debate is almost impossible.

[[!toggleable id="killgooglenext" text="""
Of course, nobody’s asking if we even *want* the next Google to
happen. I certainly don’t want another Google, nor did I want
another Facebook to come into existence. I’d much prefer having
something like [unhosted] web apps. This is what true beneficial
innovation is about.
"""]]

[unhosted]: http://unhosted.org

This way of thinking about innovation and “the Internet” has also
spread out to Courts.

Consider [this piece about how the Paris Court interpret the
LCEN](http://www.legalis.net/spip.php?page=jurisprudence-decision&id_article=2634) 
(the French translation of the [EU E-commerce 2001
directive](http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/e-commerce/directive/index_en.htm)):

> Considérant qu’en vertu du même critère, l’exploitation du site
par la commercialisation d’espaces publicitaires, dès lors qu’elle
n’induit pas une capacité d’action du service sur les contenus mis
en ligne, n’est pas davantage de nature à justifier de la
qualification d’éditeur du service en cause ;

> Qu’il importe d’observer à cet égard, que la LCEN dispose que le
service hébergeur peut être assuré même à titre gratuit, auquel
cas il est nécessairement financé par des recettes publicitaires
et qu’elle n’édicte, en tout état de cause, aucune interdiction de
principe à l’exploitation commerciale d’un service hébergeur au
moyen de la publicité ;

The crux of the argument is whether a service on the web like
YouTube is merely a hosting provider (in which case it has a
derogatory liability regime) or if it is *something else* than
merely a hosting provider, in which case they could be found
liable for copyright infringement.

The argument was that since Dailymotion (a YouTube competitor)
displays advertisement next to the allegedly infringing videos, it
must be considered an advertiser instead of a hosting provider.

And here’s the absolute nonsense: in order to respond to this
absolutely important question, the Court says that:

  - the law says a hosting provider can provide its service
  without charge;
  - which necessarily means the service is financed through
  advertising,
  - thus the law does not forbid to qualify an advertiser as a
  hosting provider.

See what happened? The problem in this reasoning is that the
second part is totally flawed. Since when a service on the web
provided free of charge is necessarily financed through
advertising? Have the judges ever heard about something called
Wikipedia, one of the largest website worldwide, hosting millions
of encyclopedia articles and media---all this without advertising
and without tracking their users. 

<small>The fact that Wikipedia is run by the non-for-profit Wikimedia is
completely irrelevant, the point is not about the commercial
nature of the provider, but really about the nature of the
activity of the service provider.</small>

Thanks to this kind of ill-advised ruling, almost nothing is done
to shape what qualifies as a hosting provider that deserves a
derogatory liability regime.

We need to take back control of innovation and technology policy
to foster privacy; more than ever.
