[[!tag kolab free_software bug lang:en]]
[[!meta title="Installing kolab, part 4"]]
[[!template id=note text="""
Other posts in the *Installing Kolab series*:
 - **[part 1](/posts/kolab_fail/ "Database error after setup script")**
 - **[part 2](/posts/kolab_fail-2/ "Setup script failure because of SLDAP")**
 - **[part 3](/posts/kolab_fail-3/ "SMTP Error 454")**
"""]]

After I upgraded from Kolab 3.0 to 3.1, hoping it would solve the
SMTP issue (i.e. I could not send email from the roundcube app
freshly setup by the kolab script! Same problem with msmtp…), I
ended up with another broken kolab instance: Roundcube wouldn't
connect to the database any more. When I was trying to restart
kolab's service, all I got was:

    root@totosh:/home/hrd# service kolab-saslauthd start
    root@totosh:/home/hrd# Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/saslauthd/__init__.py", line 114, in run
        self.do_saslauthd()
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/saslauthd/__init__.py", line 195, in do_saslauthd
        auth.connect()
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/auth/__init__.py", line 148, in connect
        from pykolab.auth import ldap
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/auth/ldap/__init__.py", line 38, in <module>
       import auth_cache
    ImportError: No module named auth_cache

Quite fed up, I tried to re-install the thing again. Yes, I'm
trying really hard to make this work.

So this time, I followed the [not-yet-official
docs](http://hosted.kolabsys.com/~vanmeeuwen/build/html/installation-guide/setup-kolab.html#install-setup-kolab)
which are up-to-date to deal with kolab 3.1, the latest release
version.

During the setup, I got this:

    Please supply a Kolab Service account password. This account is used by various
    services such as Postfix, and Roundcube, as anonymous binds to the LDAP server
    will not be allowed.

    Kolab Service password [xxxxxxxxxxxxxx]: 
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "/usr/sbin/setup-kolab", line 42, in <module>
        setup.run()
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/setup/__init__.py", line 43, in run
        components.execute('_'.join(to_execute))
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/setup/components.py", line 170, in execute
        execute(component)
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/setup/components.py", line 202, in execute
        components[component_name]['function'](conf.cli_args, kw)
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/setup/setup_ldap.py", line 483, in execute
        auth.connect()
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/auth/__init__.py", line 148, in connect
        from pykolab.auth import ldap
      File "/usr/lib/python2.7/dist-packages/pykolab/auth/ldap/__init__.py", line 38, in <module>
        import auth_cache
    ImportError: No module named auth_cache

Yet again, on a completely fresh Debian wheezy, Kolab's setup
fails.

The conclusion, that others have got to on the IRC channel (hello
bertie if you read this!) is that Kolab is not working on Debian.

So I'm now trying CentOS, which I never used… I’m not too happy to
have to try get used to a whole new system just to run Kolab. But
I guess it can't hurt to learn a little bit about CentOS and since
the machine's only purpose is actually to run Kolab, it seems like
the best choice.

Still, it would have been nice to run it on Debian. What would
have been even nicer from Kolab would be to have giant warning.

Don't waste your time trying to setup Kolab on Debian.
