[[!template id=note text="""
Other posts in the *Installing Kolab series*:
 - **[part 1](/posts/kolab_fail/ "Database error after setup script")**
 - **[part 2](/posts/kolab_fail-2/ "Setup script failure because of SLDAP")**
 - **[part 3](/posts/kolab_fail-3/ "SMTP Error 454")**
 - **[part 4](/posts/kolab_fail-4/ "Setup script failure on 3.1")**
"""]]
[[!tag kolab free_software self-hosting lang:en]][[!meta language="en"]]]]
[[!meta title="Kolab, Up and Running on CentOS 6"]]

So, after about 4 tries on Debian, I decided to give Kolab a
try on CentOS, the community derivative of Red Hat Entreprise
Linux. Fortunately, I was not completely lost here, it seems I
kept some habits from when I was using Fedora.

A few hints, if you want to install CentOS 6.

 - Finding the download link is not easy from the project's
   home page. [Go to the wiki.](http://wiki.centos.org/Download)
 - If you do a netinstall, make sure to use reliable sources
    - when I first tried using free.fr (my ISP's) mirrors, I
      had an error during the install process (something like
      <http://bugs.centos.org/view.php?id=6130>)
    - when I used the official CentOS mirrors, it went okay:
      <http://mirror.centos.org/centos/6/os/x86_64/>
 - if you try with the Live CD/DVD, make sure that your hard
   drive is encrypted using a QWERTY-layout-friendly pass
   phrase… 

After CentOS was set up, I just followed the not-yet-official
docs at kolab:
<http://hosted.kolabsys.com/~vanmeeuwen/build/html/installation-guide/>.
Everything went smoothly this time. And within a few minutes, I
was running Kolab.

So far, the only issue I've got was that I could not get an
email delivered to a @gmail.com address, Google decided that I
did not meet [their
standards](https://support.google.com/mail/answer/81126?p=ipv6_authentication_error&rd=1#authentication).
It seems the problem is that the IP address has changed and
thus Google does not like that… I hope it will resolve in the
future, there's nothing wrong with moving servers around and
pointing the domain to a new IP address after all!
