[[!meta title="Eben Moglen: privacy is ecological, not transactional"]]
[[!tag lang:en Eben_Moglen privacy ToS]]

<aside class="pull-right">
[[!img moglen.jpg]]
</aside>

> Now I spoke last time of the way in which we can decompose
“privacy,” the concepts that we float around under that word, into
three more specific parts: First, secrecy: that is, our ability to
have our messages understood only by those to whom we intend to
send them. Second, anonymity: that is, our ability to send and
receive messages, which may be public in their content, without
revealing who said and who listened or read what was said. Third,
autonomy: that is, the avoidance of coercion, interference, and
intervention by parties who have violated either our secrecy or
our anonymity and who are using what they have gained by those
violations to control us.
> 
> I would ask you also—in thinking analytically about this substance
“privacy” whose continuation I am asserting is essential to
democracy’s survival—I would urge you also to consider that
privacy is an ecological rather than a transactional substance.
This is a crucial distinction from what you are taught to believe
by the people whose job it is to earn off you.
> 
> Those who wish to earn off you want to define privacy as a thing
you transact about with them, just the two of you. They offer you
free email service, in response to which you let them read all the
mail, and that’s that. It’s just a transaction between two
parties. They offer you free web hosting for your social
communications, in return for watching everybody look at
everything. They assert that’s a transaction in which only the
parties themselves are engaged.
> 
> This is a convenient fraudulence. Another misdirection,
misleading, and plain lying proposition. Because—as I suggested in
the analytic definition of the components of privacy—privacy is
always a relation among people. It is not transactional, an
agreement between a listener or a spy or a peephole keeper and the
person being spied on.
> 
> If you accept this supposedly bilateral offer, to provide email
service for you for free as long as it can all be read, then
everybody who corresponds with you has been subjected to the
bargain, which was supposedly bilateral in nature.
>
> <cite>— Eben Moglen, <a
href="http://snowdenandthefuture.info/PartIII.html" title="Snowden
and the Future, part Ⅲ">The Union, May It Be Preserved</a></cite>

I have became increasingly convinced that this analysis is right
on. If you’re looking for evidence that the
transactional/bilateral nature of privacy is a big lie, [look no] [further] 
than how Privacy Policies and Terms of Service are set up.

[look no]: http://biggestlie.com
[further]: http://tosdr.org
