[[!meta title="Mozilla’s one week CEO steps down"]]
[[!meta description="My immediate feelings related to Brendan Eich stepping down as Mozilla CEO"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag lang:en Mozilla LGBT equality unity community]]

Just saw on twitter that [Brendan Eich steps down as Mozilla CEO](https://blog.mozilla.org/blog/2014/04/03/brendan-eich-steps-down-as-mozilla-ceo/).

We won’t even know if it would have been a good fit for Mozilla to
face the challenges ahead with Firefox OS. But what I am sure of,
is that there was definitely a mistake made by the board and by
Brendan Eich, because they didn’t see it coming. The fact that he
supported California anti-gay rights to marriage is known since
2012. He had plenty of time to think things through and to revert
his action (for instance by [counter-donating in support of marriage
equality](http://gondwanaland.com/mlog/2014/03/29/mozilla-equality/)).

I wouldn’t have stopped using Firefox or promoting it just because
of this. To put it bluntly, I do not care about Brendan Eich’s
opinion on the matter of rights to marriage. However, I care about
Mozilla’s approach and its ability to strive as a community of
people building the web and advocating our freedom to build it,
with free software. And I sure don’t want to exclude any good
contributor because of race, religion, gender or opinion (or lack
thereof)--as long as they do not contradict or weaken our common
goal. [[!toggle id="tweetmozceo" text="My take is that what unites
us is stronger than what divides us."]]

[[!toggleable id="tweetmozceo"
text="[Discuss this on Twitter](https://twitter.com/hugoroyd/status/451820015764115456)"]]

I have no particular sympathy for Eich. But the whole situation
still leaves a bit of a bitter taste, or at least some sense of
weirdness. It’s hard to process exactly and it’s hard to think how
beneficial this outcome is. What progress has been made now that
he’s out? 

Also, isn’t this a bit too harsh on the freedom to have your own
private opinions? You might say it’s a bit of a stretch because
the donation was made public; still I don’t really see this as
being made in a public capacity. It’s good to be held accountable
for what you do, and transparency is sometimes needed; but
transparency can also be an enemy. 

I prefer to convince people to change their minds through
discussion rather than winning by “having their head on a spike”
(in the case of Eich, this is an exageration). 

In the end, I suppose the attitude that I have a problem with was
along the lines of: “Eich is against gay marriage, so either he
steps down as CEO or I stop contributing to Firefox/I boycott
Mozilla/etc.” Especially taking into account [all other signs that
Mozilla is doing well on
this](https://blog.lizardwrangler.com/2014/03/26/building-a-global-diverse-inclusive-mozilla-project-addressing-controversy/)
as an organisation.
