I stumbled upon a Wired article [on Hacker
News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=6417084) this morning,
explaining how bitcoin could help homeless people:

> The bitcoin system could become an equalizer for the country’s
> homeless, a place where the stigma of living on the streets
> isn’t as pronounced.

The article shows three persons sitting on the floor with dogs and
laptops.

<i class="icon-sort-down">
[[!toggle id="save-everything" text=" "]]
</i>
I started reading Morozov’s [“To Save everything Click
Here”](http://clickherethebook.com/) and I thought it was kind of
sad that this article wasn’t published *before* the book was
released. I’m sure Morozov would have had some brilliant way to
depict how insanely absurd this is. 

[[!toggleable  id="save-everything" text="""

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p>I&#39;ve suspected this
all along: Bitcoin is just an underground government welfare
program for the homeless.</p>&mdash; Evgeny Morozov
(@evgenymorozov) <a
href="https://twitter.com/evgenymorozov/statuses/382164506534608896">September
23, 2013</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script>

I had to stop reading it when I really had to focus on the bar
written exams which was this week. So far, I liked it a lot and I
really recommend it. I suppose I’ll write a short review soon.
"""]]

The article was featured on Hacker News. I find this website less
and less interesting. It has its own cycles. For some time, I
think the website should really have been renamed “Startup News.”
But now, I don’t even think that’s what it is any more. I can’t
really tell. 

Needless to say, I feel that I really lost interest in it.
I started enjoying RSS again when I discovered
Feedbin.me (which was recently published as free software ☺ [on
github](https://github.com/feedbin/feedbin)) but this is a very
different kind of source for reading than communities like hacker
news can be. 

So I feel like somebody should start a replacement for hacker
news. Maybe something more focused on actual hackery. Why not
something else more focused on political and technological
discussions, on software freedom and larger subjects related to
technology and freedom (which are both at the centre of what
hacking means to me).

I had a look at Lamer News, a hacker news clone based on ruby
using redis for handling data. I tried deploying it to heroku but
it didn’t work for me ☹. I will investigate this later. If you’re
interested, please [get in
touch](http://hugoroy.eu/index.en.html#email).

PS: In case you didn’t know, there’s a way to get the best out of
Hacker News. First, go to your profile settings and enable the
noprocrast option which prevents you from procrastinating too much
(the feature is explained in the FAQ). Second, change your
bookmark and go read the best: <https://news.ycombinator.com/best>
and eventually leave the rest. (The fact that the “best” of HN is
so bad these days is a sign that the overall quality has really
degraded IMHO).

[[!meta title="We need another Hacker News"]]
[[!tag lang:en news technology nonsense]]

