[[!meta title="Overview of FDN & La Quadrature's challenge against Website Blocking"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag 389140 lang:en surveillance censorship webBlocking privacy freedomOfExpression law LaQuadratureDuNet FrenchDataNetwork FédérationFDN ConseilDÉtat décretBlocage 2015-125]]

This month, French Data Network and La Quadrature du Net filed a
lawsuit to the Conseil d'État, one of the supreme courts, against the
French government on website blocking.

This is part 2 of our series [“French Data Network *versus* the French Government”](/tags/FdnContreGouvernement/).


[[!more  linktext="Read ›" text="""

#### Who?

French Data Network, the Fédération FDN and La Quadrature du Net. This
is the same team working against
[[Data_Retention|overviewChallengeAgainstDataRetention]].

#### How?

Right after the [Charlie Hebdo shootings], the French government
issued a *décret* enabling a section of the police to request that
Internet access providers block access to a secret list of websites.

This décret is an application of two laws:

- the 2011 LOPPSI law which had a provision about website blocking in
  order to fight against child pornography
- the 2014 “Cazeneuve law” against terrorism which created a new
  article in the French penal code about “incitement to terrorism” or
  terrorism apology.

[Charlie Hebdo shootings]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlie_Hebdo_shooting

For us, the judicial guarantees of our freedoms of expression and of
 communication are at stake!

#### What?

There are several arguments, but in a nutshell:

 - the décret is everything but clear in limiting the scope of what the
   police can put on that secret list of websites that Internet access
   providers have to block; it could be anything from a whole domain
   name (regardless of the protocols: email, web, whatever) to a
   specific URL.

    This is problematic for two reason: 1) this is an example of the
    autonomy **left to the police to make arbitrary decisions**, without
    judicial oversight and 2) depending on what the police asks, the
    consequences can be very, very different. For instance: domain
    name blocking intercepts too much and has too much **collateral
    censorship**; while URL blocking requires **very intrusive** analysis of
    network connections, i.e. what people are doing online.


 - the décret specifies that ISP must redirect intercepted connections
   to blocked addresses to a server of the Government. This is a
   technical equivalent of denunciation and puts a risk on all of us:
   you never know whether you are going to access a blocked website
   until after you end up on the Government's server. So you better
   not try to inform yourself on sensitive issues... *The government
   has your back (and is behind your back!)*

But really, the most troubling thing is in the law: all of these
powers are exempt of effective judicial oversight.

Indeed, it's entirely possible that the police can order website
blocking without the editor or the hosting provider even aware of
this. The decision is secret, so it's very difficult to have an
efficient course of action against it. More troubling, this can have
direct consequences on everyone's privacy or freedom to access
information which hasn't been judged unlawful information.

So there's clearly not enough judicial gurantee checking on the power
of the State.

Fortunately, I think we have good case law from the European Court of Human
Rights already against France:
[Association Ekin v. France](http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-59603)
(2001). Indeed, especially when it comes to freedom of expression, it
is important that the law provides for “control over the scope of bans
and effective judicial review to prevent any abuse of power”, which, I
think in the case of the 2011 and 2014 laws is entirely missing.

If you're interested, you can [read the whole thing][recours2015-125]
(in French).

[recours2015-125]: http://www.fdn.fr/2015-125/recours.pdf

#### What next?

I'll keep you posted on the blog about the
[[!taglink procedure|décretBlocage]]. It should  take at minimum a year,
if nothing unexpected happens (but it can be significantly longer
depending on prejudicial and accessory procedures...).


------

*Related:* [La Quadrature's press release](http://www.laquadrature.net/en/france-ffdn-and-lqdn-bring-legal-challenge-against-administrative-website-blocking)
and [FDN's blog post (in French)](http://blog.fdn.fr/?post/2015/04/15/Le-blocage-des-sites-web-attaque-devant-le-Conseil-d-Etat).

"""]]
