[[!meta title="Overview of FDN & La Quadrature's challenge against Data Retention"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag lang:en surveillance privacy dataRetention law LaQuadratureDuNet FrenchDataNetwork FédérationFDN ConseilDÉtat décretLPM 2014-1576]]

[[Last_month|startingAgainstDataRetention]], French Data Network and
La Quadrature du Net filed a brief to the Conseil d'Etat, one of the
supreme courts. Our objective is simple: we want to take down data
retention.

#### Who?

  - the [French Data Network (FDN)](http://fdn.fr), the oldest French
    internet access provider, and a nonprofit organisation promoting
    the Internet and spreading knowledge on how it works.

  - the [Fédération FDN](http://ffdn.org), a federation of ISP very
    much like FDN (FDN is one of the founding members of the
    Fédération), created to spread and distribute efforts accross
    geographical locations to serve the same goal.

  - [La Quadrature du Net](https://laquadrature.net), an organisation
    of activists (which used to be an unorganisation ;-)) defending
    our rights in the digital age. Maybe you know them for their
    successful campaigns against [ACTA](http://www.laquadrature.net/en/acta).

#### How?

On December 24, the government issued a *[décret]*, an order
by the executive to enable the application of the law
(issed by the Parliament). Décrets can be challenged in court, directly to the Conseil d'Etat, until
two months after they are published. This is the procedure our
challenge is in.

[décret]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decree#France

This procedure officially targets a décret of the 2013 law setting the
strategy for military operations and prerogatives for the near future.
Specifically, article 20 of this law set new ways for the state to
access data retained by telcos and internet ISPs.

For us, this was just a legal opportunity to seize in order to bring
in our arguments in front of a court, against the whole concept of
data retention, i.e. keeping metadata and records on communications of
the whole population.

In the aftermath of the
[[!taglink European_Union_Court_of_Justice|EUCJ]] landmark decision in
*Digital Rights Ireland* (April 8, 2015; C‑293/12 & C‑594/12), laws in
Europe are being cancelled, almost automatically, one by one (lately,
in the Netherlands, see the preliminary injunction by the Hague court,
March 11, 2015). Because national judges, in matter of European Union
law, have to apply EU principles and case law directly.

So this is what we're trying to do in France. French laws on data
retention predate the 2006 EU data retention directive; so our task
seems to be a bit more difficult.

#### What?

Anyway, our introductory brief is going to be published very soon, but
here comes an overview of our main arguments:

  - the décret tries to fix the law; because the law did not define
    correctly its own scope (the definition of the type of data
    subject to the law). But that's something the government is not
    abilitated to do! The scope of the law is a legislative power
    prerogative, not the executive's.
  - the décret had to organise the administrative control defined in
    the law, but the décret doesn't do it. Thus, the government did
    not fullfil the obligations the law created.

And, of course, the main argument (part 4.1 of our legal writing):

  - This is a matter of European Union law. As the 2002 directive (so
    called ePrivacy directive) says in its article 15, measures of
    data retention must be made according to EU law principles.
  - Thus, the EUCJ *Digital Rights Ireland* decision is directly
    applicable to French laws on data retention.
  - As a consequence, the judge must realise that data retention, as
    set in French law, is clearly against our fundamental rights to
    free speech and to the respect of private life! The government
    cannot mandates telcos and internet ISPs to keep metadata and
    records on the communications of the whole population (and for *a
    whole year* at least)!



#### What next?

I'll keep you posted on the blog about the
[[!taglink procedure|décretLPM]]. It should  take at minimum a year,
if nothing unexpected happens (but it can be significantly longer
depending on prejudicial and accessory procedures...).

But as you may know, the government is currently trying to pass law
giving extremely broad powers to the state with regard to surveillance
measures, including new ways to access our communications and our
data. 

Our legal challenge has taken a new level, against the
[French surveillance state](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/01/opinion/the-french-surveillance-state.html).

------

*Related:* [La Quadrature's press release](https://www.laquadrature.net/en/in-france-la-quadrature-du-net-brings-legal-challenge-against-mass-surveillance)
