There’s a constant debate when it comes to patents and copyright
laws. Do they fit in a general category of property rights? Are
they like property at all? [[!toggle  id="rms-cr" text="[+]"]]

[[!toggleable  id="rms-cr" text="""
I can’t hide that my opinion has been influenced by the writings
of Richard Stallman, who’s been challenging the status quo for
over two decades. I’ve summarised in French some of [his
publications on the
subject](https://pinboard.in/u:hugoroy/t:richard_stallman/t:copyright/).
[[!toggle id="rms-cr" text="[hide]"]]"""]]

Current developments in patent law, especially in the US, have
given rise to concerns about the harm they might do to innovation
which they seek to guide incentives. This has been more than
obvious in the case of software and patent trolls.

Some people, instead of fixing what’s inherently wrong with
patents, are trying to find some minor fixes. Recently it has been
[proposed](http://ssrn.com/abstract=2318521) to make the patent
fees vary depending on how much the patent is “practised” by the
holder.

I stumbled upon this article (which might be a good idea, although
I think it misses the larger picture) while reading [patentlyo this
afternoon](http://www.patentlyo.com/patent/2013/09/raising-maintenance-fees-for-non-practiced-inventions.html):

 > Post-grant patent maintenance fees offer an easy mechanism for
 > shifting patentee behavior. In the US, patent holders must pay
 > a maintenance fee three times during the life of an issued
 > patent. I **think of the fee as akin to property tax.** When a
 > real-property owner fails to pay the property taxes, the state
 > forecloses. In the patent system failure to pay the maintenance
 > fees similarly results in the property right be taken from the
 > non-payer.

I couldn’t resist to take this opportunity to give a small excerpt
of how little value I think this analogy to property bears with
thinking about patents.

Earlier this year, I attended a small seminar on
“comparative perspectives of patent laws” which introduced itself
with some American literature on general theories of property.
[[!toggle  id="comp-persp" text="[+]"]]

[[!toggleable  id="comp-persp" text="""
Apart from the criticism that follows, I have to say it was a very
interesting seminar and comparative legal studies are often good
ways to self-questioning one’s views. The introduction also
featured Barry Field, “the Evolution of Property Rights” (1989)
worth reading as a whole for explaining patterns of emergence of
property rights, but maybe also for the historical account of UK
patent hero James Watt.
[[!toggle id="comp-persp" text="[hide]"]]"""]]

We were given to read Harold Demsetz, “Toward a Theory of Property
Rights” (1967). This is not the only attempt at trying a general
theory of property law that encompass patents and copyright. But
this one is interesting for some of the analysis it brings
regarding the interaction of individuals, the law, and the State;
which is at the centre of patentlyo’s thinking of patent fees akin
to property taxes.

In this theory, patent laws aim at modifying behaviour by
internalising externalities. Yes, this is an economic theory…
Later in the text, about the concept and role of property rights,
the author  outlines two ways for enrolling people
in the military. In the first one, where people are free to join
or not, the State tries to buy people in with providing for
education, salaries, etc.  In the second one, people are drafted
by default, so they can only buy a way out of the army. For the
author, there’s a kind of dynamic from no-property to property,
once we have a system that creates benefit of internalising that’s
higher than the cost of excluding people of the benefit. (In the
second system, the State gets all the benefit).

This thinking in terms of property theory is nonsense to me, just
like saying the patent fees are akin to property tax. What’s the
connection exactly? Is anything the State is creating a tax for to
be understood in terms of a property logic? Then, I’ll say that
the patent fees are like the tax on cigarettes. Just like taxing
cigarettes try to discourage people from smoking, the patent fees
try to discourage the patent holders from keeping on their patents
too long instead of unleashing the benefits of the invention to
everyone.

That’s absurd, just as absurd as  Demsetz’s theory of thinking as
military drafting in terms of property. Who’s owning what exactly?
When I was trying to answer that question while reading Demsetz,
my conclusion was that Demsetz thought of a property right in
owning oneself. But you don’t “own yourself” in the sense that
most people give meaning to the verb owning. You are free to do
things, you are responsible for your actions. 

There’s some kind of confusion between having the freedom to do
something that impacts other people, and having a right of
property on something. It’s usually much more helpful to think in
terms of rights and freedoms in general and try to think what’s
the subject/object of a “right”. [[!toggle  id="kant-rechts" text="[+]"]]

[[!toggleable  id="kant-rechts" text="""
If you don’t know what I mean here, because this is just a blog
post and I’m not thinking it through, I’m trying to draw from the
distinction made by Kant between personal rights and “real rights”
(I’m not even sure this is how it’s translated in English).
[[!toggle id="kant-rechts" text="[hide]"]]"""]]

This is to me the original flaw that’s also inherent to thinking
of patent fees akin to property tax; it’s a confusion between the
object of a right (an invention, a house) and the right itself
(your patent right, your property right). Thinking of patent law
in terms of property brings confusion.

[[!meta title="Patent fees are not like property tax"]]
[[!tag lang:en patent law nonsense]]
