Time to stop talking about the free/open Internet?
==================================================

Last week, instead of working on the bar exams, I spent some
time on
Twitter discussing with Ryan Heath, spokesperson for EU Commissioner
Neelie Kroes who's pushing for a new law on telecommunications. The
draft is drawing some criticism right now, as it's said to defeat
network neutrality (Bits of Freedom points out that the current draft
could be [incompatible with the Dutch law on network
neutrality](https://twitter.com/bitsoffreedom/status/377882941122027520)).

But I wasn't interested in the discussions on the bill itself, rather I
saw that Ryan Heath claimed to “♥ open internet” on Twitter and so it
[triggered my
curiosity](https://twitter.com/hugoroyd/status/377880421859475456). What
does “free/open internet” mean for a EU commissioner spokesperson? So
here's what he wrote:

> “open Internet” means a network everyone can access affordably and
> without restrictions on content, with room to innovate

When I asked what he meant exactly by no restrictions on content, he
[replied](https://twitter.com/RyanHeathEU/status/377883015470653441):

> Zero restrictions essentially. Of course not extending 2 content such
> as child pornography(punishable as serious criminal offence)

(I have to say it's amazing for a spokesperson that he was able to
contradict himself in less than 140 characters.)

I think this illustrates that the term open internet is to be avoided.
It is clearly meaningless and does nothing to help frame the discussion.

So I think I’ll add this to my list of buzzwords that I try to avoid:
Cloud computing, Big Data, Open Web, (add yours).

* * * * *

On a side note, the argument of the EU Commission spokesperson
that evenining was: if you fight against us on this, that means
you're against enabling [internet-innovation for
hospitals](https://twitter.com/RyanHeathEU/status/377873152787099648).
Because you know, if your hospital does not have the right surgeon,
[there’s an app for
that…](https://twitter.com/RyanHeathEU/status/378196072856043521)

This kind of thinking must be avoided. Laws that regulate internet
intermediaries should not be made solely on the basis of market
regulation; because the internet is an important infrastructure
for all of us, it's more importantly a matter of freedom and human
rights.

BTW, if you apply that market approach to the examples of hospitals in
need of prioritized internet access, that also implies that you allow
telecoms to [charge hospitals more
money](https://twitter.com/RyanHeathEU/status/377873152787099648) for
the privilege of prioritized access. Well done.

* * * * *

PS: I’ve always disliked the expression “open Web.” Not so much because
I prefer the term Free Software over Open Source because it refers to
freedom, which I think is more important and less ambiguous than “open”
but also because the expression itself implies that there is such a
thing as a “closed Web.” Then, what would that be? A website with Flash?
I don't even consider flash as part of the web, but just some
proprietary blobs served over http. I don't think that everything served
over http is necessarily part of the web.
