
[[!meta title="Publication of the User Data Manifesto 2.0"]]
[[!meta language="en"]]
[[!tag privacy surveillance userData DataRights lang:en]]
[[!meta copyright="[Online Communities 2, by XKCD](https://xkcd.com/802/), used under a [Creative Commons non-commercial licence](https://xkcd.com/license.html)"]]

This morning, we are officially publishing the
[User Data Manifesto 2.0][udm2].

[udm2]: https://userdatamanifesto.org/2.0/


Today, most of users’ data are not stored on their computer’s hard
drive any more, but rather online on a service provider’s server
somewhere in a data center.

While most computing happened on local machines, in the late years a
new kind of “computing“ has emerged in daily use. Marketers have
called this “Cloud computing”---but do not mistake, as there is no
cloud, it's just some one else's computer.

[[!img noCloudFSFE.png alt="There’s no Cloud!"]]


Most popular online services nowadays are gratis, but that does not
mean that they come at any cost. Instead of paying with money, people
are paying allegiance to service providers. In the land of
“Minitel2.0”,
[Google and Facebook are our like feudal lords of the Internet](http://udm.branchable.com/tags/Internet_Feudalism) and we are their mere subjects. The exploitation
of user data and of personally identifiable information is leading to
numerous privacy invasion, some of which were only revealed thanks to
Edward Snowden’s leak from the NSA.


<aside class="sidenote right">
Bruce Schneier. [The Battle for Power on the Internet (extract)](https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2013/10/the_battle_for_1.html):

> I have previously characterized this model of computing as "feudal." Users
pledge their allegiance to more powerful companies who, in turn, promise to
protect them from both sysadmin duties and security threats. It's a metaphor
that's rich in history and in fiction, and a model that's increasingly
permeating computing today.

> Medieval feudalism evolved into a more balanced relationship in which lords had
responsibilities as well as rights. Today's Internet feudalism is both ad-hoc
and one-sided. Those in power have a lot of rights, but increasingly few
responsibilities or limits. We need to rebalance this relationship. In medieval
Europe, the rise of the centralized state and the rule of law provided the
stability that feudalism lacked. The Magna Carta first forced responsibilities
on governments and put humans on the long road toward government by the people
and for the people. In addition to re-reigning in government power, we need
similar restrictions on corporate power: a new Magna Carta focused on the
institutions that abuse power in the 21st century.

> Today's Internet is a fortuitous accident: a combination of an initial lack of
commercial interests, government benign neglect, military requirements for
survivability and resilience, and computer engineers building open systems that
worked simply and easily.

> We're at the beginning of some critical debates about the future of the
Internet: the proper role of law enforcement, the character of ubiquitous
surveillance, the collection and retention of our entire life's history, how
automatic algorithms should judge us, government control over the Internet,
cyberwar rules of engagement, national sovereignty on the Internet, limitations
on the power of corporations over our data, the ramifications of information
consumerism, and so on.

> Data is the pollution problem of the information age. All computer processes
produce it. It stays around. How we deal with it — how we reuse and recycle
it, who has access to it, how we dispose of it, and what laws regulate it — is
central to how the information age functions. And I believe that just as we
look back at the early decades of the industrial age and wonder how society
could ignore pollution in their rush to build an industrial world, our
grandchildren will look back at us during these early decades of the
information age and judge us on how we dealt with the rebalancing of power
resulting from all this new data.

</aside>

[[!img xkcdMap.png alt="Map of Online Communities by XKCD" caption="Online Communities 2, XKCD" link="http://xkcd.com/802_large/" ]]

If you're looking to protect your privacy or if you want to know how
your rights can be affected when using these online services, you
usually don't have many options but to look for [adjusting]
[increasingly complex] [privacy settings] or you need to be a full time lawyer
to read the lenghty [terms of service](https://tosdr.org).

[adjusting]: http://www.michaelzimmer.org/2012/05/07/how-to-adjust-your-facebook-privacy-settings-2012/
[increasingly complex]: http://personalweb.about.com/od/makefriendsonfacebook/a/faceprivsetting.htm
[privacy settings]: http://www.wired.com/2013/08/facebook-privacy-settings/



-------------

The User Data Manifesto aims at defining the basic rights that users
should have on their own data when using online services. Recognising
these rights is an important first step towards a free society in the
digital age, along with [Free Software](https://fsfe.org).

Indeed, users should have:

1.  Control over user data access

    User data should be under the ultimate control of the user. Users
    should be able to decide whom to grant direct access to their data
    and with which permissions and licenses such access should be
    granted.

    Data generated or associated with user data (e.g. metadata) should
    also be made available to that user and put under their control
    just like the user data itself.

2.  Knowledge of how user data is stored

    When user data is uploaded to a specific service provider, users
    should be informed about the geographic location that specific
    service provider stores the data in, how long, in which
    jurisdiction that specific service provider operates and which
    laws apply.

    This point is not relevant when users are able to store their own
    data on devices in their vicinity and under their direct control
    (e.g. servers) or when they rely on systems without centralised
    control (e.g. peer-to-peer).

3.  Freedom to choose a platform

    Users should always be able to extract their data from the service
    at any time without experiencing any vendor lock-in.

[Read the full text of the manifesto here](http://udm.branchable.com)


-----------------

I'm very happy that, with Frank and Jan, we are today announcing the
[release of version 2.0 of the manifesto](https://userdatamanifesto.org/2.0/)
during the [ownCloud conf keynote](https://owncloud.org/conf/).

Organisations and activists defending digital rights are joining in
this effort to support online services that respect users’ rights. I
am proud to be part of that effort and I hope it's the start of a
constructive debate and, hopefully, a humble contribution to our
society.

I look forward to your feedback on the manifesto, which I view as a
starting point rather than an end in itself.

---------------------

Thanks to ownCloud, Inc for inviting me over to the ownCloud conf in Berlin.
