[[!meta title="What’s going on with Data Protection?"]]
[[!tag lang:en dataProtection EUCJ ECJ]]
[[!meta copyright="Privacy notices under CC-0 https://twitter.com/neil_neilzone/status/543036681759514624"]]

The [[!taglink EUCJ]] has just published [another decision][c-212_13] regarding [[!taglink data_protection|dataProtection]] that got me puzzled (but I'm not the only one!).

This one is primarily concerned with the interpretation of exceptions to the 1995 directive, but it also has interesting things to say regarding to the infamous [[!taglink so-called_right_to_be_forgotten|rightToBeForgotten]] decision where [[legitimate_interests_of_personal_data_processing|/posts/rtbf-what-cjue-got-wrong/]] was involved.

[c-212_13]: http://curia.europa.eu/juris/documents.jsf?num=C-212/13

The facts are simple: someone puts a camera to monitor the entrance of his house. One day, people break in but they are later identified. Then, these suspects challenge the legality of the camera system on the grounds that they were not notified of the processing of their personal data.

Article 3 of the 1995 directive provides:

> 2. This Directive shall not apply to the processing of personal data:
>    […]
> 
>     –        by a natural person in the course of a purely **personal** or **household activity**.’

But for the Court, (emphasis is mine)

> 33. To the extent that video surveillance such as that at issue in the main proceedings *covers, even partially, a public space and is accordingly directed outwards from the private setting* of the person processing the data in that manner, it cannot be regarded as an activity which is a purely ‘personal or household’ activity

This is a strange reasoning in my opinion, as it seems to make no distinction between *purely personal activities* and *purely household activities*--they are now combined under the criteria of the “private setting.”

[Neil]: http://neilzone.co.uk/

------

So here's how this applies to us: thanks to [Neil], we already have a solution!


<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Following today’s CJEU ruling, I have launched new data protection compliance stickers for everyone with a smartphone <a href="http://t.co/WHa72i05iM">pic.twitter.com/WHa72i05iM</a></p>&mdash; Neil Brown (@neil_neilzone) <a href="https://twitter.com/neil_neilzone/status/543013244894711808">December 11, 2014</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>


<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Don’t want to be filmed or photographed? Get my new, trendy “right to object” jumper-based notification: <a href="http://t.co/sCwmsXtgGd">pic.twitter.com/sCwmsXtgGd</a></p>&mdash; Neil Brown (@neil_neilzone) <a href="https://twitter.com/neil_neilzone/status/543035098732711936">December 11, 2014</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

## How does this relate to the so-called right to be forgotten?

The Court notes that:

> 34.     At the same time, the application of Directive 95/46 makes it possible, where appropriate, to take into account — in accordance, in particular, with Articles 7(f), 11(2), and 13(1)(d) and (g) of that directive — *legitimate interests pursued by the controller, such as the protection of the property, health and life of his family and himself*, as in the case in the main proceedings.

I wish the Court followed the same approach in the so-called Right to be forgotten decision. But instead, the [[legitimate_interest_of_the_public_to_access_published_information_has_not_been_taken_into_account|/posts/rtbf-what-cjue-got-wrong/]].
 



