[[!meta title="Arrêt en Allemagne : conditions de résiliation de la licence GNU GPL verseion 3"]]
[[!tag lang:fr pubAvocat Allemagne jurisprudence droit freeSoftware GPL-3]]

En Allemagne, un arrêt intéressant relatif à la licence GNU GPL
version 3 [rendu au mois de juillet pour la cour d'appel de Halle (Saxe-Anhalt)][lgHalle].

Les conditions de résiliation ([[!toggle id="gpl3-sec8" text="section 8"]]) — si elles offrent « une seconde chance » au licencié qui remédie à ses manquements sous 30 jours ([[!toggle id="gpl3-sec8" text="sec. 8(3)"]]) — n'empêchent pas l'ayant-droit d'obtenir la réparation du préjudice résultant des manquements du licencié.

[lgHalle]: http://www.landesrecht.sachsen-anhalt.de/jportal/?quelle=jlink&docid=JURE150012453&psml=bssahprod.psml&max=true


[[!toggleable id="gpl3-sec8" text="""
[Conditions de résiliation de la GPL-3][gpl3-sec8] :

> 8. Termination.
> 
>   You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly
> provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propagate or
> modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under
> this License (including any patent licenses granted under the third
> paragraph of section 11).
> 
>   However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your
> license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)
> provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and
> finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
> holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means
> prior to 60 days after the cessation.
> 
>   Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
> reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
> violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
> received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that
> copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after
> your receipt of the notice.
> 
>   Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the
> licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under
> this License.  If your rights have been terminated and not permanently
> reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for the same
> material under section 10.
"""]]

[gpl3-sec8]: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt


Extrait de l'arrêt ([traduit par JBB][tradJBB]) :

> Contrary to the Defendant’s opinion, section 8 para. 3 of the GPL
> version 3 of 29 June 2007 does not preclude the asserted claim. This
> is the case because **even though the provision grants reinstatement
> of the licence to the violator on the condition that the violation
> is remedied within 30 days** of receipt of a corresponding notice, as
> the Chamber would expect in light of Mr.           affidavit.
> However, this granting of the right to continue using the licence
> **cannot be interpreted to mean that the licensor at the same time had
> the intention of waiving his right to demand a cease and desist
> declaration with a penalty clause from the (first time) violator.**
> Despite the fact that the licensor thereby affords the violator a
> “second chance” to use the licence, it does, on the other hand, have
> an interest worth protecting in the lasting prevention of further
> infringements after the first infringement has occurred. If the
> interpretation of the Defendant was correct, this would in effect be
> tantamount to an invitation to every user of the licence to violate
> the terms of the licence in the secure knowledge that he would only
> need to reckon with having to submit a cease and desist declaration
> with a penalty clause or a cease and desist order issued by a court
> upon discovery of the second case of infringement. Based upon an
> equitable interpretation of section 8 para. 3 GPL version 3 of 29
> June 2007, neither the pre-trial warning letter to the Defendant nor
> the assertion of the claim for injunctive relief through the courts
> appear to be meaningless or in bad faith.

[tradJBB]: http://www.jbb.de/en/news/open-source-software-preliminary-injunction-based-violation-gpl-30


[Plus d'informations sur la licence GPL-3](http://gplv3.fsf.org/)
